---
ver:
- 1
- 2
commit:
- ec55880551d503ddbecba0a8a50d4fe629dc1411
- d4132c4b762ed099fd7e2a32f8901fd9e998e9c1
diff_del: 203
diff_ins: 206
---

---
headline: 'ADHDyslexic Journey'
date: 2018-04-14
category: dyslexia
version: <del>1</del><ins>2</ins>
---

### Normal. <del>Disablity. Differance.</del><ins>Disability. Difference.</ins>

Words are funny things. They are identifiers or names we put on things. Socially, we<del>have</del> put these things that we name into neat little boxes of meaning and stick a label on it; usually <ins>it's</ins> the same as the name of that thing inside. All of this in an attempt to make the complexities of <del>communcation</del><ins>communication</ins> and understanding as brief as <del>possiable.</del><ins>possible.</ins> Over time we put boxes into more boxes; these are then passed down to us. When a conflict appears between the meaning we were given and the meaning we <del>experiance</del><ins>experience</ins> for ourselves, we create new boxes to put these things in; sometimes we use different labels on these new boxes that are now at odds with the ones we were originally told to carry. <del>Nevermind</del><ins>Never mind</ins> that both boxes contain the same thing.

Reading through personal accounts of <del>dsylexia</del><ins>dyslexia</ins> and ADHD, I found that the first paragraph usually contains something along the lines of: "It's not a <del>disablity,</del><ins>disability,</ins> it's a difference". Little boxes. Is it a <del>disablity?</del><ins>disability?</ins> Yes and no. What context are we working from? A <del>disablity</del><ins>disability</ins> is a condition that limits or impairs a person's ability to perform a <del>certian</del><ins>certain</ins> task. This is so absurdly broad that if we use it literally, everyone has a <del>disablity</del><ins>disability</ins> in some area of life. <del>ADHD/Dsylexic</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexic</ins> and socially standard brains <del>diverege</del><ins>diverge</ins> by using different pathways to reach the same goal. It doesn't matter if that path is being viewed as an impairment to the `normal` way or if it's being viewed as the overlooked rebel. Until we stop clinging onto our neatly <del>orginized</del><ins>organized</ins> boxes, the brains that work outside of the <del>inherated</del><ins>inherited</ins> social constructs will continue to be duct taped to the <del>disablity</del><ins>disability</ins> box. All of this, in a messy effort to avoid the <del>uncomfortbleness</del><ins>uncomfortableness</ins> that comes with any major change to the `normal` order of things.

Once I learned my brain was `broken` I was <del>hell bent</del><ins>hell-bent</ins> on `fixing` it. I dove into books (audiobooks) on cognitive and <del>behavioural</del><ins>behavioral</ins> science, self-improvement, neurobiology, neuroplasticity, and even how-to material. I was sure there was something there that I could use to make myself `normal`. On the outside I presented as someone who embraced being different. Inside, I felt defective and just wanted to be `normal` so I could fit in for once. Normal is dangerous. It has been perverted from the average standard into the de facto, and often times, the de jure standard - i.e., the only correct way. This creates a human divide between those that <del>tic</del><ins>tick</ins> all of the boxes on an <del>inherated</del><ins>inherited</ins> list of what `normal` is and those who do not.

### Road to Enlightenment

Years of my life were spent trying to hide my inner shaming, insecure, <del>self-lothing</del><ins>self-loathing</ins> bully that relentlessly <del>harrassed</del><ins>harassed</ins> me.

When I finally gave in to the pride and ego I built up to gloss over the inner pain and <del>embarresment,</del><ins>embarrassment,</ins> everything changed. I sought help. It took a few months and some awkward moments dealing with side effects to get the medication right. Explaining that AdderallXR knocks you out for the best sleep of your life will net some side-ways glances.

Before this, I would lose hours, days and weeks even; I had no idea where they went. One of the exciting aspects of my ADHD is time blindness. I <del>dont</del><ins>don't</ins> get it. Labeled time is an odd concept that I have difficultly structuring things around. The world does not even agree on a time format or calendar. I limit scheduling things if it is not <del>absoultuely nessary.</del><ins>absolutely necessary.</ins> People end up seeing me as either fun and <del>spontanious</del><ins>spontaneous</ins> or <del>committment</del><ins>commitment</ins> phobic. Truth is that <del>commiting</del><ins>committing</ins> to anything further than a few days out causes intense <del>anxitey</del><ins>anxiety</ins> for fear of forgetting about it and letting others or myself down. The <del>combonation</del><ins>combination</ins> of time blindness and slow reading ability wrecks havoc on productivity. Not being aware that either of those are a factor can cause confusion that slowly eats away at your self-esteem.

Once the right medication was found, I felt superhuman. I could control time itself. Finally, I could choose to sit down and read a regular book cover to cover. That was it. I avoided reading walls of text because I <del>couldnt</del><ins>couldn't</ins> get myself to sit down long enough to do it. Now I could. No more scanning through pages of words while my mind was off doing its own thing. Now I could sit down for a couple <ins>of</ins> hours and actually read that 12 page chapter.

I was reading news and blog <del>articals</del><ins>articles</ins> from top to <del>bottom</del><ins>bottom,</ins> without falling down the wiki rabbit hole in search of more information about a place or event that caught my attention. Yet, something about it bothered me, the estimated read times were just misleading. Those 8-10 minute <del>articals</del><ins>articles</ins> took 30-40 minutes to read; they were consuming my entire day. My first thought was <ins>that</ins> there <del>was</del><ins>must be</ins> a miscalculation - but on multiple sites? Off to find the general average words-per-minute read time for an adult and re-calculate some previous <del>articals.</del><ins>articles.</ins> 8-10 minutes.

### Falling Through the Cracks

Turns out that <del>dsylexia</del><ins>dyslexia</ins> is rarely about seeing letters or words backwards. Although, it is one possible <del>manifstation</del><ins>manifestation</ins> on a spectrum. It is a grab bag <del>quriks,</del><ins>of quirks,</ins> similar to ADHD.

Of those quirks, difficultly with phonological <del>proccessing</del><ins>processing</ins> and/or rapid visual-verbal processing will probably be the ones that cause the most <del>embarressment;</del><ins>embarrassment;</ins> not only for yourself, but everyone around you as well. Phonological processing is understanding letter sounds or the ability to `sound out` words. When this goes funny, learning to <del>subsitute</del><ins>substitute</ins> words <del>or</del><ins>and</ins> change entire sentences or statements <del>becuase</del><ins>because</ins> there is a word that you can't pronounce becomes a common coping method.

Rapid visual-verbal processing is the ability <ins>to</ins> rapidly translate the visual <del>recongnization</del><ins>identification</ins> of some thing into the <del>verberal</del><ins>verbal</ins> output of it's name. Sometimes this word is similar to a word that <ins>I</ins> can not <del>be pronounced</del><ins>pronounce</ins> or looks similar to a word that I know is not the correct one. This causes<del>more</del> hesitation as the two words are fighting it out <del>for</del><ins>to be</ins> the final <del>visual reprentation</del><ins>representation of that thing, as a word that I see in my head,</ins> to be verbally output. The <del>words</del><ins>words,</ins> or sections within the <del>words</del><ins>words,</ins> visually bump each other out<del>in my head</del> until the right <del>combonation</del><ins>combination</ins> is found; hopefully the final word is one I can pronounce, if not, I may use a <del>synanoym.</del><ins>synonym.</ins> My verbal <del>speech</del><ins>communication</ins> tends to be drastically different than my written <del>speech,</del><ins>communication,</ins> and much less <del>cohrent</del><ins>coherent</ins> when trying to explain something. The proper explanation is in my head, yet it refuses to find its way out verbally in the same way I <del>visuallise it.</del><ins>visualize it and I end up describing the context surrounding it instead.</ins>

These are probably most pronounced when having to read aloud in a <del>classroom, or even bedtime stories and public speaking.</del><ins>classroom.</ins> Each word not only has to be decoded and processed, now it has to find its way back out. Tack on the additional <del>anxity</del><ins>anxiety</ins> of being fully aware that the snickering and laughter from the rest of the class has turned into dead silence and stares of confusion. I could generally count on only having to read aloud once for each teacher, each year. Only the brave or forgetful called on me twice.

Another <del>fustrating</del><ins>frustrating</ins> and publicly damaging <del>situration</del><ins>situation</ins> is knowing the answer to a question, only to be randomly called on to answer and <ins>my</ins> words fail. The answer is there, you see the answer in your head. Nothing comes out. The confusing part is when the impulsiveness of ADHD blurts <del>outs</del><ins>out</ins> proper answers before the question has been fully asked. If the teacher is having a good day, you<del>will</del> get ignored or asked to wait and raise your hand. If <del>its</del><ins>it's</ins> a bad day, expect to be snapped at or <del>scoulled.</del><ins>scolded.</ins> It is a bit of a no-win <del>situration.</del><ins>situation.</ins> The answer was right so the <del>teach</del><ins>teacher</ins> will keep calling on you randomly, only, being put on the spot will usually cause a block in being able to express an answer in any <del>cohearent</del><ins>coherent</ins> way. This happens everywhere, not just school, and appears as if the person talking is being rudely cut-off or ignored. That <del>was</del><ins>is</ins> not the intention, but they <del>dont</del><ins>don't</ins> know that.

A large part of excelling in school requires skill in rote <del>learning;</del><ins>learning,</ins> remembering <del>infomation</del><ins>information</ins> such as dates, names, exact statistical facts, etc. Then connecting these to the event story, current or historical. The who, when, and where to the what, why, and how. The first three tend to be the priority on test; simple facts are easier for multiple choice answers. <del>Accuratelly</del><ins>Accurately</ins> condensing the breadth of an event to 160 <del>charaters</del><ins>characters</ins> or less, is unlikely to happen.

The one saving grace about this style of <del>assesment</del><ins>assessment</ins> is understanding that <del>standardise</del><ins>standardize</ins> testing is just that, <del>standard.</del><ins>standardize.</ins> There is a very ridged framework, i.e, pattern, that they are built on. <del>Especally</del><ins>Especially</ins> the history/english/reading sections. I could count on answering <del>atleast</del><ins>at least</ins> a third of the questions by finding the answers <del>in</del><ins>within</ins> other questions using <del>contexual</del><ins>the contextual</ins> clues between them. This is <del>easest</del><ins>easiest</ins> in the reading comprehension sections. The questions [at the time <del>atleast]</del><ins>at least]</ins> follow the story in a <del>liner</del><ins>linear</ins> fashion, narrowing down the search <del>area,</del><ins>area</ins> and <del>then tells</del><ins>telling</ins> you where the answer is found. Add in multiple choice <del>options</del><ins>options,</ins> and cross referencing them to the words in the search area, means never having to actually read most of the short story in order to obtain perfect <del>comprehention</del><ins>comprehension</ins> scores.

The result of our test-dominate education is <del>prioitizing</del><ins>prioritizing</ins> rote learning/information in classrooms. Rote learning relies on verbal/phonological and semantic memory to remember dates, names, stats, and the chronological order of items on a list. A disadvantage for the many dyslexic brains that learn best through active, <del>associtive,</del><ins>associative,</ins> or observational learning. These styles rely more on the visual-spatial and <del>epicsodic</del><ins>episodic</ins> memory; images, big picture stories, connections and <del>experiances.</del><ins>experiences.</ins> Throw in ADHD's overloaded working memory and none of it will matter if the ADHD brain is not stimulated by how or what is being taught. It will find something more interesting to focus it's attention on.

### Math and Timed Test

A little known aspect of dyslexia is how it can affect math. School math likes to rely <del>heavly</del><ins>heavily</ins> on rote information; math tables, formulas, recalling a particular set of preferred steps to solving a problem and other facts. The why, or logic and understanding the goal of the problem, is skimmed over for <del>follow</del><ins>following</ins> someone else's preferred solution <ins>-</ins> verbatim. This hampers the independent <del>critial</del><ins>critical</ins> thinking aspects of math for the <del>reguritating</del><ins>regurgitating</ins> of facts and processes that someone else told you was important to pass an exam.

I simply can not recall most math table pairs and must solve for<del>most</del> basic <del>arthmatic</del><ins>arithmetic</ins> - every time. <del>Identifing</del><ins>Identifying</ins> and naming <del>equasions</del><ins>equations</ins> or remembering which rule/formula/method to use, let alone listing the order and steps needed to solve <del>them -</del><ins>them,</ins> is an exercise of futility. Remembering static facts is needed to successfully pass exams. Over the years, many dyslexic brains <ins>learn to</ins> adapt coping <del>stragities</del><ins>strategies</ins> to hack our way through <del>standerised</del><ins>standardized</ins> learning; if not give up altogether due to a lack of external support or caring. These are <del>personal</del><ins>personalized</ins> methods of taking the required information and teaching it to ourselves in a way that we can use. It's not always pretty, but it usually works well enough.

My coping method involved <del>assoicating</del><ins>associating</ins> the steps into what amounts to a <del>youtube</del><ins>YouTube</ins> clip of solving the <del>equasion;</del><ins>equation;</ins> where the numbers visually <del>calculat</del><ins>calculate</ins> and <del>move/shift</del><ins>move or shift</ins> to proper places in my head. To save space, some of the steps were grouped together. The clips that I <del>would manage</del><ins>managed</ins> to save still had to be paused and rewound at times; all while trying to export it to paper. This causes problems when part of the grade includes showing the steps to solve it. It looked on paper that I went from step one to step four to the correct <del>anwser</del><ins>answer</ins> at step six by lucky guesswork; often receiving half a point marked off a correct answer. Another no-win that ended in a jaded attitude towards math.

Test on the <del>ablity</del><ins>ability</ins> of application, not memorization.

A fun aspect of <del>partisapating</del><ins>participating</ins> in rote memory math exercises <del>was</del><ins>is</ins> blurting out answers that <del>made</del><ins>make</ins> no sense to anyone but myself. Let's say it is my turn to quickly recall an answer to a <del>multiplcation</del><ins>multiplication</ins> table pair that is then _written_ on the board or <ins>shown</ins> on a flashcard: `4 x 8`. There is a good chance my answer would be 12; `8 x 4` and my reactive answer may be 2. <ins>`4 x 4` and I'll get a vision of a truck off-roading in a forest somewhere.</ins> For reasons that I do not fully grasp, my brain's first reaction is to make <del>spontanous patteren</del><ins>spontaneous pattern</ins> connections instead of retrieving static pieces of information. Ask the question verbally, and my answer would be a blank stare from being put on the spot and needing to figure out what I just heard and translate that into a visual <del>repensentation;</del><ins>mind representation of the question;</ins> if given time, I would then go through the _process of solving_ the problem and answer. The more common <del>senerio</del><ins>scenario</ins> to being asked verbally, would end with me starting to formulate a sound of some sort right as the teacher gave up and snappily called on another.

As much fun as all of that is, it is not even the most exciting part of math for many <del>adhd/dyslexic</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexic</ins> brains. That is reserved for word problems.

“At 10:00 AM train A left the station and an hour later train B left the same station on a parallel track. If train A traveled at a constant speed of 60 miles per hour and train B at 80 miles per hour, then at what time did train B pass train A?” - Word problems can trigger an ADHD focus flight response;<del>as</del> in what world are 2 trains running on parallel tracks, which do not diverge or merge, in the same direction an hour apart at a distance where the latter train eventually passes the first? That rail line <del>need</del><ins>needs</ins> a new logistics operator. Cue <del>obssesive</del><ins>obsessive</ins> thought cycling on what or where the <del>trick</del><ins>_trick_</ins> to the question is, because <del>why</del><ins>_why_</ins> would they run trains like that?

Even if my ADHD <del>doesnt</del><ins>doesn't</ins> get side tracked by the content, stabbing my hand with the needle point of a <del>compas</del><ins>compass</ins> is a more exciting option than dealing with the added <del>bounus</del><ins>bonus</ins> of reading a paragraph, sometimes littered with semantic oddities, in order to identify and extract the _correct_ question - before solving for it.

Part of my dyslexic brain enjoys skipping and/or changing small words when reading and <del>writting</del><ins>writing</ins> such as: _is_/_as_, _in_/_on_, _to_/_too_, _of_/_for_, _that_/_then_, etc. It also changes <del>contexual</del><ins>contextual</ins> words and phrases into something similar when I <del>recognise</del><ins>recognize</ins> the meaning but <del>cant</del><ins>can not</ins> pronounce the <del>word; resulting</del><ins>word. This results</ins> in a longer more <del>verboss</del><ins>verbose</ins> sentence that only exist in my head. If I <del>dont recognise</del><ins>don't recognize</ins> the word and am not able to quickly look it up, it gets skipped over in the hopes I can figure out the gist of it from the other <del>contexual</del><ins>contextual</ins> clues in the paragraph. All of this happens without my full awareness. It is only when the changes cause such a jarring <del>sematic</del><ins>semantic</ins> effect that I can then figure it out. At that point, reading comes to a dead stop and I end up having to re-read the <del>sentance, possiably</del><ins>sentence, possibly</ins> the paragraph, another 3-4 times before spotting where the translation went wrong. The end result is usually wasted time and solving the wrong math problem.

Add these word problems to a timed test, let's say the <del>SATs, and it</del><ins>SATs. That</ins> results in having so many unfinished problems that scribbling in random bubbles, before the second more directed instruction to put the pencil down, will still not answer each question in the section <del>in</del><ins>within</ins> the given time.

### A Different Path to the Same Goal

How does someone with the <del>inablity</del><ins>inability</ins> to keep up with the reading material, across all core subjects, and inhibited pathways towards rote learning finish primary/grade school without the <del>accomadations</del><ins>accommodations</ins> granted to identified dyslexic learners? It's different for each of us. Generally the answers will circle around finding ways to use the pathways, or <del>strenghts</del><ins>strengths</ins> of our <del>adhd/dyslexic</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexic</ins> brain, to find loop holes in the structure of the system and in the human element of those in power. If it's an honest answer it will also make mention of <del>atleast</del><ins>at least</ins> one person, if not more, that believed in them and <del>didn't</del><ins>did not</ins> waiver in that belief; whether that person was a family member, coach, teacher, after-school mentor, it <del>doesnt</del><ins>doesn't</ins> matter. Having someone see and believe in our ability can be the difference between<del>us</del> giving up and<del>us</del> finding a way to break through.  

Dyslexic <del>strenghts</del><ins>strengths</ins> play directly into <del>althletic</del><ins>athletic</ins> skills and sports; these include visual memory and processing, pattern recognition and prediction, and spatial awareness. While most people have some level of these aspects, these are the more common pathways used by dyslexic brains, and thus, exercised more. It expresses itself a bit more naturally; the same way reading <del>skill</del><ins>skills</ins> do for others.

America's obsession with sports provides an alternate route for dyslexic and non-dyslexic students to obtain that <del>covented</del><ins>coveted</ins> degree. High School and College. What ever one's opinion on the matter, many <del>teachers/proffessors</del><ins>teachers/professors</ins> are either directly or indirectly nudged to pass <del>student-althelets.</del><ins>student-athletes.</ins> There are the handful that refuse to budge. It is also easy to transfer into a class with a coach doubling as an instructor, or <del>find</del><ins>finding</ins> those credits elsewhere. With large class sizes and pressure to <del>gradurate</del><ins>graduate</ins> students, giving a passing grade to a <del>student-althete</del><ins>student-athlete,</ins> knowing the administration looks the other <del>way</del><ins>way,</ins> is an <del>attracitive</del><ins>attractive</ins> option. It will be someone else's problem next year.

As it turns out, <del>negotioating</del><ins>negotiating</ins> with teachers on <del>assignmments</del><ins>assignments</ins> and test are also valid ways to <del>gradurating.</del><ins>graduating.</ins> Classes with teachers that advise school clubs and <del>origaniztions</del><ins>organizations</ins> can turn into working partnerships; <del>especally</del><ins>especially</ins> when <del>leveragering</del><ins>leveraging</ins> one's position on the school's morning news production, newspaper, yearbook and photography staff. What if a teacher has no <del>affliations</del><ins>affiliations</ins> or you are not a part of any school <del>orignazation?</del><ins>organization?</ins> Look for a problem or <del>inefficeny</del><ins>inefficiency</ins> within the teaching material or process, then find a way to solve for it. Having access to and knowledge of PageMaker and Illustrator in the mid-90's allowed me to exchange teaching material and publicity of their pet projects for passing grades on reports and test that I knew I would not complete within the time given.

### Carving Out Space

A common sentiment I hear when discussing programming with <del>non-programmers</del><ins>non-programmers,</ins> or someone interested in making an app they have an idea for, follows along the lines of thinking it would be fun but not exploring that path because they <del>dont</del><ins>don't</ins> like or are <del>'bad'</del><ins>`bad`</ins> at math. At some point someone told them they needed to be great at math to program. While there are some programming <del>disiplines</del><ins>disciplines</ins> that are math intensive, web application or app programming rarely is. For the few times the app needs to perform a complex calculation, finding the rules needed to calculate it properly are <del>an internet</del><ins>a WolframAlpha or Stack Exchange</ins> search away. Being able to <del>creativly</del><ins>creatively</ins> and <del>elegently intergrate</del><ins>elegantly integrate</ins> the <del>componets</del><ins>components</ins> interacting with the calculation is were the value is found.

So many people hold back from pursuing an attractive occupation or hobby due to the weight of carrying, as their own, someone else's opinion of what they can or can not do. For many <del>with adhd/dyslexia,</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexic types,</ins> we hear the <del>negitivity</del><ins>negativity</ins> more than others simply <del>becuase</del><ins>because</ins> we do things different. We can be <del>frustrating and we</del><ins>frustrating. We</ins> are not usually trying to be difficult, just the <del>oppsite.</del><ins>opposite.</ins> It wears others down, they are expecting us to conform to how <del>they beleive</del><ins>_they_ believe</ins> we need to be if we ever want to achieve <del>their</del><ins>_their_</ins> idea of a successful life. I <del>beleive</del><ins>believe</ins> many of them are well intentioned, they just <del>dont</del><ins>don't</ins> realize they are doing more harm than not.

Obviously, being influenced by the <del>negitivity</del><ins>negativity</ins> of others can apply to anyone; the most damaging aspect is the internalizing of other people's <del>opinon</del><ins>opinion</ins> and holding it as your own. It's a common theme found through-out many personal stories of <del>those with adhd/dyslexia.</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexia types.</ins> While those stories eventually inspired the <del>writting</del><ins>writing</ins> of this one, they first provided a guiding light out of the darkness of self-loathing and worthlessness, and into self-love and acceptance. There is peace and clarity in <del>knowning</del><ins>knowing</ins> that our life <del>experiances</del><ins>experiences</ins> are not caused by being <del>'defective',</del><ins>`defective`,</ins> instead, it is a result of trying <ins>to</ins> fit into someone else's idea of <del>'normal'.</del><ins>`normal`.</ins>

The environment and <del>avaiable</del><ins>available</ins> support systems play a <del>large</del><ins>large, and understated,</ins> part in how well <del>ADHD/dyslexic</del><ins>ADHD/Dyslexic</ins> brains navigate this world. A world that throws us in the deep end waiting to <del>congradulate thoes</del><ins>congratulate those</ins> that find a way to doggie-paddle their way out, and chiding the ones drowning for being lazy and not trying hard enough. Choose empowerment and compassion for others, and yourself.
